.Dd February 24, 2026
.Dt CONTACTCTL 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm contactctl
.Nd administration utility for contactd
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm user
.Aq add|list|delete|passwd
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm
.Cm export
.Op Ar flags ...
.Nm
.Cm import
.Op Ar flags ...
.Ar file-or-dir
.Nm
.Cm version
.Op Fl -format Ar text|json
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
manages users and imports/exports vCards for
.Xr contactd 8 .
It is intended for local administration and scripting.
.Pp
User-management subcommands operate directly on the SQLite database.
The export/import commands are useful for backups, test fixtures, and cloning
datasets across multiple users.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width "import"
.It Cm user add
Create a user.
Supports
.Fl -password-stdin
to avoid password exposure in process listings.
.It Cm user list
List users in table or JSON format.
.It Cm user delete
Delete a user by
.Fl -username
or
.Fl -id .
.It Cm user passwd
Update a user's password by
.Fl -username
or
.Fl -id .
.It Cm export
Export an addressbook as vCards.
Directory mode writes one
.Pa .vcf
file per card; concat mode writes concatenated vCards.
.It Cm import
Import vCards from a directory of
.Pa .vcf
files or from a concatenated vCard file.
Directory imports use the filename as the CardDAV href.
Single-file imports use
.Aq UID Ns Pa .vcf
as the href.
.El
.Sh COMMON OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d , Fl -db-path Ar path
SQLite database path.
Default:
.Pa /var/db/contactd.db .
.It Fl -db Ar path
Alias for
.Fl -db-path .
.It Fl -dry-run
Validate and summarize without writing files (export) or database changes (import).
.It Fl V , Fl -version
Print version and exit.
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Print help and exit.
.El
.Sh EXPORT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm contactctl export Fl -username Ar user Op Fl -book Ar slug Op Fl -format Ar dir|concat Op Fl -out Ar path Op Fl -dry-run
Export vCards from the selected addressbook.
.Pp
If
.Fl -format Cm dir
is used,
.Fl -out
must name a directory.
Files are written with mode 0600.
.Pp
If
.Fl -format Cm concat
is used and
.Fl -out
is omitted, the vCard payload is written to standard output.
.El
.Sh IMPORT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm contactctl import Fl -username Ar user Op Fl -book Ar slug Op Fl -dry-run Ar path
Import vCards into the selected addressbook.
.Pp
If
.Ar path
is a directory, all
.Pa *.vcf
files are imported.
If
.Ar path
is a file, concatenated vCards are parsed using
.Dq go-vcard .
.Pp
Cards without a
.Dq UID
field are rejected.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Create a user:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
printf '%s\en' 'secret' | contactctl user add --username alice --password-stdin
.Ed
.It
Export a user's addressbook to a directory:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
contactctl export --username alice --format dir --out ./backup
.Ed
.It
Preview an import without writing:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
contactctl import --username bob --dry-run ./backup
.Ed
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr contactd 8
.Sh AUTHORS
Project uses
.Lk https://github.com/emersion/go-webdav go-webdav
and
.Lk https://github.com/emersion/go-vcard go-vcard
by Simon Ser
.Pq emersion .
