.Dd March 17, 2026
.Dt CONTACTD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm contactd
.Nd minimal CardDAV daemon using SQLite
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl hV
.Op Fl l Ar addr
.Op Fl p Ar port
.Op Fl d Ar path
.Op Fl -base-url Ar url
.Op Fl -log-level Ar level
.Op Fl -log-format Ar fmt
.Op Fl -auth-max-concurrency Ar n
.Op Fl -auth-fail-delay Ar dur
.Op Fl -trust-proxy-headers
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
serves a CardDAV endpoint over HTTP and stores contact data in SQLite.
It is intended to run behind a reverse proxy that terminates TLS.
.Pp
Invoking
.Nm
without arguments starts the daemon using environment variables and
built-in defaults.
The subcommand
.Cm serve
is accepted as a backward-compatible alias.
.Pp
The daemon exposes a single health endpoint at
.Pa /health
which returns 200 when the database is reachable and 503 otherwise.
The
.Pa /.well-known/carddav
path redirects to the DAV root without requiring authentication,
as required by RFC 6764.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Print usage and exit.
.It Fl V , Fl -version
Print version and exit.
.It Fl l , Fl -listen-addr Ar addr
Listen address in
.Ar host:port
form.
Default:
.Sq :8080 .
Cannot be combined with
.Fl p .
.It Fl p , Fl -port Ar port
Convenience shorthand: listen on
.Sq :PORT .
Cannot be combined with
.Fl l .
.It Fl d , Fl -db-path Ar path
SQLite database path.
Default:
.Pa /var/db/contactd.db .
.It Fl -base-url Ar url
Public base URL used for the
.Pa /.well-known/carddav
redirect.
When unset the redirect target is
.Pa / .
.It Fl -log-level Ar level
Log verbosity:
.Cm debug ,
.Cm info ,
.Cm warn ,
or
.Cm error .
Default:
.Cm info .
.It Fl -log-format Ar fmt
Log format:
.Cm text
(daemon-style, syslog-compatible) or
.Cm json .
Default:
.Cm text .
.It Fl -auth-max-concurrency Ar n
Maximum number of authentication checks that may run concurrently.
Additional requests block until a slot is free or the request context
is cancelled.
Set to 0 to disable the cap.
Default: 8.
.It Fl -auth-fail-delay Ar dur
Duration to hold a failed-authentication response before replying,
expressed as a Go duration string (e.g.\&
.Sq 500ms ,
.Sq 1s ) .
Adds backpressure against credential-spray attacks.
Set to 0 to disable.
Default: 0.
.It Fl -trust-proxy-headers
Trust
.Sq X-Forwarded-For ,
.Sq X-Real-IP ,
and related proxy headers when recording the remote address in access
logs.
Enable only when
.Nm
is behind a trusted reverse proxy.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
Configuration precedence is: flags > environment > defaults.
.Ss Core
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CONTACTD_LISTEN_ADDR
Listen address.
.It Ev PORT
Fallback port when
.Ev CONTACTD_LISTEN_ADDR
is unset.
.It Ev CONTACTD_DB_PATH
SQLite database path.
.It Ev CONTACTD_BASE_URL
Public base URL for redirects.
.El
.Ss Logging
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CONTACTD_LOG_LEVEL
Log level
.Pq Cm debug Ns / Ns Cm info Ns / Ns Cm warn Ns / Ns Cm error .
.It Ev CONTACTD_LOG_FORMAT
Log format
.Pq Cm text Ns / Ns Cm json .
.It Ev CONTACTD_TRUST_PROXY_HEADERS
Trust proxy headers
.Pq Cm true Ns / Ns Cm false .
.El
.Ss Auth hardening
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CONTACTD_AUTH_MAX_CONCURRENCY
Maximum concurrent auth checks.
.It Ev CONTACTD_AUTH_FAIL_DELAY
Failed-auth response delay (Go duration string).
.El
.Ss Limits
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CONTACTD_REQUEST_MAX_BYTES
Maximum request body size in bytes.
Default: 10485760 (10 MiB).
.It Ev CONTACTD_VCARD_MAX_BYTES
Maximum stored vCard size in bytes.
Default: 10485760 (10 MiB).
.El
.Ss Bootstrap
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CONTACTD_USERS
Semicolon-separated list of
.Ar username:bcrypt-hash
pairs to seed on startup (empty database only, unless
.Ev CONTACTD_FORCE_SEED
is set).
.It Ev CONTACTD_USER_*
Per-user seed variables.
.It Ev CONTACTD_FORCE_SEED
Re-apply seed users even when the database already has users
.Pq Cm true Ns / Ns Cm false .
.It Ev CONTACTD_DEFAULT_BOOK_SLUG
URL slug for the default addressbook created for each seeded user.
Default:
.Cm contacts .
.It Ev CONTACTD_DEFAULT_BOOK_NAME
Display name for the default addressbook.
Default:
.Cm Contacts .
.El
.Ss Retention and maintenance
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CONTACTD_CHANGE_RETENTION_DAYS
Prune sync-journal entries older than this many days.
Default: 180.
.It Ev CONTACTD_CHANGE_RETENTION_MAX_REVISIONS
Prune sync-journal entries beyond this maximum revision count per
addressbook.
0 disables the cap.
.It Ev CONTACTD_PRUNE_INTERVAL
How often the background prune task runs, as a Go duration string.
Default:
.Cm 24h .
.El
.Ss Feature flags
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CONTACTD_ENABLE_ADDRESSBOOK_COLOR
Enable the
.Sq http://inf-it.com/ns/ab/
addressbook-color PROPPATCH/PROPFIND extension
.Pq Cm true Ns / Ns Cm false .
Default: false.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /var/db/contactd.db
Default SQLite database path.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Daemon exited cleanly after receiving
.Dv SIGTERM
or
.Dv SIGINT .
.It 1
Runtime error (listen failure, shutdown error).
.It 2
Startup error (bad configuration, database open failure).
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Run with defaults:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
contactd
.Ed
.It
Listen on a specific address with a custom database:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
contactd -l 127.0.0.1:8080 -d /var/db/contactd.db
.Ed
.It
Check daemon health:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/health
.Ed
.It
Seed a user on first start:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
CONTACTD_USERS="alice:$HASH" contactd
.Ed
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr contactctl 8
.Sh AUTHORS
This project uses
.Lk https://github.com/emersion/go-webdav go-webdav
and
.Lk https://github.com/emersion/go-vcard go-vcard
by
.An Simon Ser
.Pq emersion .
